All right. Well, hello and welcome back
to the embedded online conference. We
are now getting ready to start our first
workshop uh obviously live for this
year's embedded online conference. So,
uh Nathan Jones is here and he's going
to be walking you through exception
handling. So, Nathan, how's everything
going today?
>> Uh it's great. Uh, Jacob, it's a nice
kind of cloudy spring day here in New
York.
>> Excellent. Perfect. Nice spring day is
uh fantastic. So, um, obviously with
everything, what we're going to do, the
way this works is I'm going to hand
everything o over to Nathan and then
he's going to run the workshop for you.
So, if you end up needing anything, uh,
we'll be around for you. But, uh, enjoy.
>> Thanks, Jacob. I like that we're
starting with me. We're gonna set the
bar low and then just all the other
workshops are going to get even better
from here. So, um I'm I'm really excited
that that y'all are here. Um while I'm
doing my little intro, um I want this to
be excuse me, very interactive. So, so
let's crack the ice on that on that uh
that little chat box. While I'm doing my
intro, go ahead and and share with the
group just where you're dialing in from,
uh and if you want, share a little fun
fact about yourself. uh just so we can,
you know, get some comments in there and
and and feel free uh to ask your
questions uh as I'm going along uh in in
that chat box. I'll do my best to to
read them and answer them and if I miss
any, then just just let me know. All
right, so let's see if I can um share
some slides.
All right, excellent. Um
cool. Um okay, so today we're talking
about exception handling. Um, and uh,
and I feel like I need to specify a
little bit what that means. Um, I mean
exceptions, not exceptions. And by that
I mean, um, we're not talking
specifically about the like try catch
exception handling mechanism uh, that
you have in languages like C++ and and
Java and Python. I'm talking more
broadly about uh, what might be
considered like exceptional
circumstances.
um a a it would not be too incorrect a
term to say we're talking about error
handling here. Um but I do want to make
a differentiation between exceptions and
errors also.
Uh errors to me uh very specifically are
like uh like bugs like things that are
impossible. So I got some examples here
of um you know dreferencing a pointer
before it's been allocated memory
allocated for trying to take the square
root of a negative number. Um and uh and
and uh so these are things that truly
should never happen in the system. If
they do, something's gone horribly,
horribly wrong. Um possibly our system's
under attack. And uh and so really,
honestly, the best case if if we
encounter an error like this is to
probably reset the system or or possibly
revert to a safe mode. So instead, we're
going to talk today about uh exceptions,
which are things that might actually
occur during the operation of our device
um but you know would cause a problem if
we sort of let them percolate through
the system. Okay, so I've got a couple
examples here of um you know maybe when
I'm doing a math operation, anytime I'm
adding something or multiplying two
numbers together, there's a chance that
that result overflows my 16- bit value
or my 32-bit value, right? And and so
that might be something I need to
account for in my system. If I'm if I'm
getting large, you know, doing math on
large numbers, I might get some invalid
user or sensor input, right? Maybe I've
got a little field and it the user is
supposed to type in a number, but they
type their name in instead. Okay, so
this is, you know, I can't expect the
user to not make mistakes. So I've got
to account for this in my program. Um,
and uh and and the purpose the purpose
of this whole thing is to hopefully get
programs that are really robust. So,
there's this fun uh joke about the QAQ
engineer that, you know, is testing his
bar and he orders a beer. He orders zero
beers. He orders 99 trillion999,000
beers. He orders a lizard. He orders
negative one beers. He calls it good.
The first customer walks in, asks for
the bathroom, and the whole bar catches
on fire. Okay. So, what we don't want
our programs to do is this, right? We
don't want them to sort of, you know,
work on our desks, work even in our
testing environment, work work in our
labs, and then as soon as they get
fielded to an actual user, um, you know,
these these things crop up that cause
the system to to fail, right? We want
things that are robust that can kind of
react to these exceptional circumstances
um gracefully and and either continue
operating or at least, you know, sort of
fall back to some sort of some sort of
safe mode, right?
Um, so, so here's kind of the the the
broad brush strokes of of what I want to
take you through today. Um, you can kind
of see three large three large things
that we're going to we're going to try
to practice, which are just identifying
first those exceptions that we're trying
to respond to. We're going to talk about
how to report those exceptions once we
detect them to our system. And you can
see here that there are several
different ways to do that. Uh, which
include the try catch exception handling
mechanism in C++ and a few others. And
then we're going to talk about uh
responding to these exceptions. Um now
there are honestly probably
hundreds of thousands of different ways
that we could, you know, um detect,
report, respond to our errors or these
exceptions. Um I'm going to focus on on
just a couple that I feel like are going
to give us sort of the most bang for the
buck. Right? you know, my um uh sort of
at the forefront of my mind as I'm as I
was trying to teach myself how to how to
handle these exceptions uh was, you
know, how do I do this in a way that's
not ownorous, right? That doesn't
introduce a ton of complexity to my
system. So, so hopefully at the end of
this uh this workshop, we have several
techniques that um are not difficult to
kind of, you know, work into or bolt on
to your systems that that make them a
little more robust, right? Um those
first we'll go through a couple of
steps. So the first four steps are
essentially focused on uh maybe our leaf
what we might call our leaf functions.
These are functions that don't exactly
um aren't making calls or running
operations necessarily that would report
errors back. These these are the sort of
the you know the the functions at the
end of the call chain um that are the
ones actually detecting the exceptions.
Um, and then the last few steps we'll
talk about if we're higher up in the
call stack, if we're at the task level
or the system level, how we might
actually uh respond to those.
Um, okay. So, I've got a little case
study uh that we'll we'll use to walk
through the first couple of scenarios.
You can see uh on the left hand side, I
got a little task. Uh, it's calling
three functions in a little infinite
loop. Um, function A is going to give us
a value. Function B is going to operate
on that value. And then C does function
C does something different. Um just to
kind of you know finish the little
sequencing and then the loop starts back
up. Um and we'll say here function A uh
is going to read from just my my analog
to digital controller on my
microcontroller. So um I want to be
careful about my infinite loop here. So
I've got a little timeout value uh once
I start my ADC conversion. I'm
effectively waiting for that done flag
to get set. But if the timeout happens
before then, you know, I'll I'll I'll
terminate that loop. Uh and then I
return my ADC result. Um okay. So step
number one in in making sure that this
program is robust is just sort of
identifying what sorts of exceptions I
might need to or want to deal with. So
in this little example, uh I can think
of two right off the top of my head,
which are by the time this while loop
terminates, um number one, I might uh I
might have actual like error bit set in
in a in a status register that my ADC
ran into some sort of error. Um so even
though that while loop is finished, I
don't have a valid ADC result. Um or
like I mentioned before, maybe uh maybe
for whatever reason uh the the
conversion took longer than I expected
it to. you know, there's something that
wasn't happening correctly. And so I
exited my loop because the timeout value
ran out, but I still don't have a valid
ADC value. Um, and these are just two of
uh um a whole whole list of things that
might crop up in your system. Um, so
what we're going to do next is uh
brainstorm a little bit what types of
exceptions um you've seen and you've had
to deal with in your systems or maybe
just sort of like what are some that
come off the top of your head. Um, and
I'll reiterate just uh that that first
note or one of those first notes I had
which is you know we're going to we're
going to try to think specifically about
exceptions not errors. uh in in this
case if the ADC peripheral were not even
initialized before I started my
conversion you know I would call that I
would call that an error because that's
like a programming bug right like some
the the software that developer that was
in charge of you know setting up the
module or setting up the system they
goofed right they didn't initialize this
thing they didn't turn on the clock to
that peripheral or something like that
um so so some so some so some so some so
some so some so some so some so some so
some so that may be a little better
handled with an assert you know we're
going to in development we're going to
assert that this is true and if it ever
trips then we know we have to go back to
our setup code and reinitialize that.
We're going to focus on, you know,
exceptions. So, these are not
programming errors. They're not bugs in
our code. They're just weird stuff that
might happen in in the course of our
program running uh that we want to deal
with. All right. Um, so I'm going to I'm
going to pause for a couple minutes and
uh give us an opportunity to kind of
kind of brainstorm. Um, and that'll give
me also a chance, I think, to read the
chat. Um, give me as many in the chat,
give me as many examples of of possible
exceptions as you can think of. Um,
again, you can think of previous or
current projects that you've been
working on. Uh, or I've got a couple of
links here to some sample projects that
I'll uh I'll use throughout the the
workshop uh if if you just want like a
little simple system to kind of kind of
work on. All right. So, let me introduce
those real quick and then I'll I'll cut
you loose. Um, okay. So, let's see. I am
sharing this. just and see if I can
share my
a different window.
This is the one I want.
Um I think yeah. Okay.
Okay. So, um in in no particular order,
all right, I've got a couple of uh
circuits on Wacwe that we can play with.
All pretty simple. I think the first
link there is to this system uh which is
for the Arduino Uno R3. Uh it's reading
from a temperature sensor and an
accelerometer. Uh and the uh the system,
let's see if I can get it to work here.
Uh is going to report the temperature
and acceleration values on this little
uh character um 20x4 character LCD. And
uh the servo motor here is uh I believe
reacting to the temperature from the
temperature sensor. Okay. So you can you
can see here in the code that after some
setup really the loop is just you know
getting a new temperature getting a new
acceleration data and then updating some
stuff. All right. So that might be a
great test bed for hey what what are
some exceptions we want to do with this.
The next one here is uh very similar but
I wanted to try to make it a little more
complex. Okay. So I've got an ESP32 now
uh which is again reading from a
temperature sensor in the accelerometer.
Um let's see. I think when I was running
this I I think it was running but I
might have may have been getting some
errors. This this system is trying to
save data also to the to an SD card. Uh
and uh and then publish temperature data
to uh an MQTT server. Um full disclosure
I had chat GPT help make these examples
for me. So uh and I was working on this
stuff at the last minute. So I can't
guarantee that it's all going to work.
But this is uh has a bunch of great
little functions in terms of like
sending stuff over Wi-Fi uh trying to
save stuff to an SD card um to like
think about okay how am I you know what
sort of exceptions do I need to to
handle here. Um now thankfully both
these are working for me. I think the
conference as a whole is taxing the walk
servers significantly this week. So if
you are trying to run either of these
and you're getting like you know build
server busy errors or something like
that the last link is to a little
Tinkercad circuit here um which is u
much reduced in its complexity
unfortunately because Tinkercad just
doesn't have as many sensors as uh as
Wii does u but this one very similarly
is reading from a temperature sensor
setting the angle of a servo motor um to
that temperature and then reporting the
temperature and the um uh um the button
presses on this little IR remote on the
LCD screen. All right. Um, so plenty of
stuff to work with. Like I said, um, uh,
I'll pause for just a second. I'll
glance into the chat and take a couple
minutes to just sort of brainstorm. What
are all the all the ways that these
systems or systems you've worked on
might uh, produce exceptions that we'd
want to deal with to make sure that they
don't fail prematurely in the field.
I love this. I love this. We got uh we
got folks from all over the world.
Firstly, this is phenomenal. Germany,
Uruguay, um all over the US. Super cool
that y'all are joining us. Um Bolivia,
love it. Um and I'm seeing I'm seeing a
lot of great uh a lot of great
exceptions as well. Let me go back to my
slides here because I also have um a
little list.
All right. Um, so Bruce, I mentioned
some sort of numeric overflow or
underflow. Maybe I'm getting some
invalid sensor values. A lot of us
identify various communications errors.
Um, so maybe uh I'm getting a par error
on my UART stream or um I'm getting just
sort of guard noise on my signal. Maybe
the um the device is not connected or
not responding quickly enough. So I'm
getting a little timeout. Um there were
um a lot of really great creative ones
too. So next one I got here is you know
just sort of odd behavior in my system
as potentially being an exception I want
to I want to handle. So, uh maybe for my
system, uh you know, my my temperature
sensor for instance, you know, uh if it
if it tells me it's, you know, it's it's
outside reading the temperature and it
tells me it's 400 degrees Celsius, well,
that's a little weird, you know, and um
and maybe there's nothing inherently
wrong with um um with the
you know, there's not like an error that
I need to address, but like that value
doesn't make sense. Um, and in fact,
I've got a little note here that that's
potentially sort of like one, you know,
one cause of the the 737 Max crash,
right? You can see here that, um, the
angle of attack sensors, or at least one
of them was, um, faulty and reported an
incorrect value. It, you know, caused
the plane to crash and and there's a
whole slew of, uh, mistakes that led to
this point here. Um but you can imagine
you know that if you know there was the
software in place to say hey this does
this make sense that you know our angle
angle of attack you know went instantly
from 15 degrees to 75 degrees is that
physically possible? That might have
been something that an exception that
could have been reported up to the
system to say maybe we distrust the
sensor reading a little bit. Um couple
of folks identified peripherals not
being connected at all. Um, which you
could argue, hey, if once I've sealed up
my system, that's that's a pretty low
error and sure, but in development that
can be really nice. If I'm swapping
sensors out for my system to not just,
you know, if I swip, you know, swap out
a sensor, I've got a loose wire, the
system just doesn't immediately crash or
hang, right? You know, I have a means of
sort of um, you know, recovering and
alerting the developer to the fact that,
hey, there's something a little weird
with this sensor here. I'm not getting
any any data for it. Um, or, you know,
of course, file not found errors, that
sorts of stuff, right? Yeah. So, um I I
feel like one challenge definitely when
we're doing this is just uh having a
good list to think about like you know
what what do I need to to consider? So,
um this list or the list in the chat
feel free to you know save that so as
you're as you're working on future
projects you can kind of check hey do I
need to worry about any of these these
exceptions here. Um, I found another
great list on Phil Copman's blog, um,
which where he was linking to an article
from a couple of researchers at Carnegie
Melon. Um, and they they built this
little fishbone diagram as a nice little
checklist to say, hey, are any of these
things, you know, stuff I need to worry
about? Um, and the funny part of the the
acronym is that it spells out children.
So, you know, sometimes children are
your problems. Um, and uh, now I would
say that uh, maybe situation dependent,
but there's probably some on here that I
might classify more as like programmer
errors or or something like that. You
know, if I'm dividing by zero, uh, it
feels like that that's probably me
incorrectly calling a function uh, um,
rather than, you know, an exception
maybe I need to I need to handle. U, but
otherwise, another great list for us to
for us to use. Okay. Um so after we have
identified uh which exceptions we want
to handle um the next thing we're going
to do is just sort of set up the
function to report those errors. We're
going to take this in baby steps. All
right. So uh you can see here uh really
in my reading five overall kind of ways
that we might do this. So you got you
you have your your try catch um um
mechanic in C++. so I can throw an
error. Um, excuse me. The other really
popular alternative is to use a return
value. Um, full disclosure, that's
probably my personal favorite. Um, so I
can just write my function so that you
know if an error happens, that's the
value coming out of my function. Uh, it
makes it a little weird if my function
was supposed to return a value anyway
because that means I need to I need to
set up a little pointer in my in my
argument list for the function to store
the value and then give me an error when
it when it comes back out. Um but um but
that notwithstanding uh there's lots to
like about this. Now um one one big
problem one one big criticism of return
values are that uh folks can ignore them
right you know many of us forget that uh
print f returns a a value of how many
characters were printed and but none of
us check it. Um and in certain cases,
right, this is really important in C and
C++ 23 at least, we get the uh you know
the fun function modifier no discard.
And so this will uh this this can help
try to eliminate those. This will throw
a compiler error if uh a function uh
with no discard has returned a value to
a uh a piece of the calling program that
then doesn't you know check or use that
value later on in the code. So this can
be kind of a helpful way to make sure
that like those those return values are
in fact being used. uh the three up at
the bottom are a little more situational
but they do have their place. So uh if I
really really need the uh the return
value of my function to give an actual
value to my program. Um I might just
swap you know swap those uh the the
return value and the error. So I might I
might just put a little pointer in my
the argument list for my function and
then my my function can set the error
you know or the the code there to let my
program know um what the what's been a
miss. Um, I can use a local variable,
right? Arno is sort of the, you know,
the the prototype child for this. So,
there are still lots of C library
functions that will set ANO. Um, uh, and
and this could be a good technique for
my for your system potentially. Um, I
know global, you know, we kind of
discourage global variables, but um,
this slots in really nicely if I'm
working on legacy code and I can't
change my function signatures. So, I
have just a function that wasn't
returning any sort of error codes
initially. Okay. Okay. Well, I can kind
of bolt on a little, you know, file
local or something uh air node variable
that I my functions can set which I can
then use in my code if I can't really
update my legacy code. And then the last
one here is um some sort of signal or
callback function. Um and uh and so this
is uh like you can kind of see here,
maybe I'm passing in a function pointer
that I want to have called if there's an
error. Um or if I'm in C++, maybe
there's, you know, um in in in in the
methods list, I can put, you know,
specific uh sort of error handlers, if
you will, uh for for when when these
errors occur. Um
this is this is most useful if if um I
have a very specific action that I want
done for, you know, all types of all of
one type of error regardless of sort of
where it happens in my code. Think if
you will like the um like an error ISR
from a peripheral, right? If you know,
if I had set up a an ADC error
interrupt, you know, what would I put in
there? Um, you know, the drawback of
this is that it doesn't inherently
change my control flow, right? So, this
is like a very this is a a tool that I
would use if I, you know, wanted to for
for every single type of an error that
occurred, I want a specific fix and then
I want the the program to more or less
continue running. Um, okay. So couple of
really important notes on on all these
on the right hand side. You can see here
number one error reporting is absolutely
part of the API. Okay. So all all these
functions that I'm writing that are
reporting you know some type of error
code um that that's part of the the
function signature and should get
elaborated um you know in the in the
documentation. Um and then secondly very
related uh those error codes should be
at the same level of abstraction as the
uh the function itself. Okay. So I mean
if I'm calling um uh you know a function
to to send send data up to a you know
MQTT server um then it does it's not
going to make sense to the calling
function if the error that comes back is
like you know file not found or sensor
you know sensor detached or something
like that right it's got to be at the
same u the same uh level of abstraction
and so um you know if I have multiple uh
multiple functions in my call stack that
all kind of returning errors that might
mean that you when one percolates an
error up I my my function has to sort of
repackage it if you will to provide a
you know an error up to the calling
function that makes sense to them. The
last note down here is a couple of
places I've got I've got got this error
t or error no variable which are kind of
standins for probably an integer but
they could be lots of things. Um, you've
got plenty of options, right? It could
be could be just a boolean, right? No
error, there was an error. Uh, it could
be some type of enumeration or integer
to indicate like no error and then here
are two or three or four of the possible
errors that, you know, maybe a calling
function uh might find useful to try to
respond to this thing. Um, I could put
uh information in a strct. So now I can
maybe package together like my error
number with like a little error message
or something. Um, and I can get a lot of
work done with what are called sum
types. Um, which are basically data
types that have either a valid value uh
or uh some type of error. So st optional
is a great example of kind of a sum type
where the stit optional data type is
either a valid piece of data or null.
Um, and st expect is another one where
it's either a valid piece of data or
some type of error type. Uh, I could do
the same things in C with just like a
tag union. It takes a little more leg
work, but but I can do the same things
there. Um, so when you see error t,
right, or air, no, um, just keep in mind
that this could be, you know, I could I
could do all kinds of crazy stuff with
this to like send back tons of air
information if I want. Although, in the
simplest case, this is just like a
boolean or an integer value.
Um, okay. I kind of hit most of these.
These are like, you know, when you might
want to use each of these strategies.
Um, I'm gonna try not to I'm gonna try
to to not dip my toes in the try catch
versus return value flame war. Like I
said, I do have an opinion that and we
can we can talk about that later if you
have questions, but u for all intents
and purposes, these are all five
perfectly valid ways to handle
exceptions and you should go with
whichever one makes the most sense for
your system.
Um, okay. So, in preparing to report
this exception, again, we're taking this
in baby steps. Um what I want to do is
uh just change my function and my
calling code so that uh if in the future
I want to do some sort of exception
handling I'm able to do that. So here's
an example of taking our um our little
case study and um you can kind of see
the changes in the highlighted portions
here um where my function a um I'm
changing it. So it's going to return a
value now. Previously was returning my
ADC result. So, I'm going to put that in
my argument list. Uh, in the actual body
of my function here, you'll notice that
I I have an error code. I'm returning
it. I'm not doing anything with it,
right? This is just like, you know, I'm
sort of laying the foundation in the
future so that um I can I can work on
this if I want to in my calling code
now. Um, made a couple of changes,
excuse me, so that uh I am, you know,
receiving that error. Again, I'm not
doing anything with it. Um, but it's
just the infrastructure is there for
later on when I eventually um decide to
to to actually respond to this
exception. Um, and uh, step number two
once we've done that is celebrate. And
I'm not kidding here. As I was getting
these notes ready, I'm trying to think,
okay, what's what do as developers, what
do we need to be able to to to to build
these robust programs? And and maybe one
of it is, you know, we need some
knowledge. You know, hopefully you see a
bunch of code snippets today that you're
like, "Hey, this is really cool. I can
use this in my program to respond to
these errors." But I think there's lots
of things in life like as we're code.
Like we all know we need to write test
code. Hardly some of us ever, you know,
some of us don't even have don't have
that habit in place. And and it's I
think because we we're so focused on
writing the function, it feels like a
lot of work to write the test code. Um
and so we're like, I will do that later.
And I think we might run into the same
problem here. And and if I can give you,
you know, one one great thing to
practice as you're trying to build
robust programs is set the bar set the
bar low. Okay? So, you know, make it
really so maybe the first two things you
do are just these, right? You identify
which exceptions we're trying to handle
and we just sort of set up our function
signatures so that you know, if in the
future we want to return some sort of
error code, we can do that. Um, and then
celebrating is big is a really important
part of helping solidify that habit. Um,
I read a great book a couple years ago
called Tiny Habits by BJ Fog. There are
many like it. Um, but the kind of crux
is that uh, you know, to build these to
build things into habits so that we do
them consistently. Um, among a few other
things, two really important things to
do are one to make it really easy
because if it's really easy, then it's
not hard to sort of get myself over it,
right? If I'm if I'm late on a deadline
and I'm writing this function and I'm
like, ah, shoot, I need to do some I
should probably do some error handling.
If I if I tell myself I've got to do all
this stuff later, we're going to see.
I'm going to go, "Ah, I can't. That's
too much." Right? But if I make it
really easy, if I say, "Okay, all I'm
going to do, I'm just going to put a
couple of comments in here like todo
later on, check for these, and I'm going
to set up the function signature so that
if I do end up returning an error code,
there's not a whole bunch of changes
that have to propagate through my
codebase." Um, then I'm much more likely
to just, okay, I'll knock that out, you
know? And number two, when we celebrate,
when we when we create that strong
emotion, that positive feeling of like,
all right, I did a good thing here, um,
our brains, they like it likes that
feeling, right? And so the next time we
write the function, we go, hey, it was
pretty easy last time to just throw a
couple of comments in there about like
which exceptions I wanted to handle. It
felt really good when I did it, so I'm
going to do it again.
Um, so in tiny habits, BJ Fog says, "You
can celebrate any number of ways. You
know, you can give yourself a little
fist pump. You can say, "Hey, way to go,
Nate Jones." Um, I'll give you one that
I thought was really fun as I was
preparing this presentation. And that's
a little sticker, right? We put a
comment at the top of our code with this
cute, adorable little Asky bunny that
says, "Yeah, I did it." Right? Sus
Bunny. Sus Bunny says, "This function
has identified possible exceptions and
is getting them mad side eye." And so,
uh, you know, honestly, I'm maybe I
can't do this in a professional setting,
but I'm super stoked. the next function
I write to like, you know, identify
these errors, make sure I'm returning
the error code, and then slap this at
the top and be like, "Yeah, Sus Bunny is
checking out my function and making sure
that, you know, I'm I'm I'm prepared for
possible exceptions." Um, and you know,
if that's that's what helps me get over
the hump next time of like just kind of
starting this process, then hey, that's
that's a good job. All right. Um, okay.
So, more exercise time. So, um, again,
we we identified a whole bunch of great
exceptions. Many of those probably were
from previous projects. Uh, so if you if
you have one that you know you can pull
up, then absolutely we can go there. But
otherwise, you've got the three projects
that I uh I introduced to you a few
slides ago. Um so your job is to from
that list of exceptions, possible
exceptions that we identified. Um let's
go in there and let's start modifying a
few of those functions so that we are um
um you know uh putting those exceptions
that we think we need to deal with in
the comments. We're restructuring the
function signatures just a little bit to
report error back. Uh you can choose any
one of these any one of these five.
Although I think in all my examples I'm
using the AVR GCC compiler which I think
doesn't support try catch. But if you've
got a C++ project where you've got you
know you can use try catch then then you
can you can play around with that. Um
and then uh then don't forget to
celebrate. All right. Um I'll pause for
uh for another couple minutes to let us
just kind of pull up some of that code
and play around with um you know
preparing to handle those exceptions and
and then we'll keep going in about five
10 minutes.
All right, I love it. Thanks to Bank
Banks G02 for posting that great sample
in there. Lots of us commenting back too
about how to, you know, all these little
math errors that might crop up if we're
not careful. Um, let's see. Did someone
just post uh the EPROM? Yeah.
Um,
okay. So, who who let's see. Oh, Angel.
Yeah, you're you're thinking the same
thing I'm thinking. I zeroed in on that
one uh to kind of play around with. So,
here's you can kind of see on the left
here um in the comments what I might do
to update the EPROM function because
absolutely, you know, uh if I'm writing
to and from memory, there's lots of
things that could go wrong there. Um if
it's external memory, absolutely, right?
Something could go wrong in the
communication process. This is onboard
EROM on the Arduino that I'm saving to.
But even still, um you know, there could
be a problem with writing writing that
data. So, um you know, I chose to to to
kind of zero in on um you know, making
sure that that memory doesn't get
corrupted. Uh you can see um down here
kind of the main little thing I'm adding
in the comments, which is like I'm going
to do some sort of check sum, right? I'm
going to have a little this is uh this
this code is set up to store to do like
a little I think ring buffer of 10 10
data values for like each temperature
and acceleration. So you know um there'd
be a little more leg work than this,
right? But we could put a little check
sum at the end. Every time we store some
data, recompete that check sum and make
sure it matches, right? And if it
doesn't, okay, then what I've got here
is a little flag variable called corrupt
that I'm going to set to true. And then
on subsequent calls to the program, it's
only going to write to the EPROM as long
as it's, you know, it's not been
corrupted. Um, and if it has, then I'm
going to report some sort of like memory
failure back to the calling program. Um,
and uh, if I wanted to be a little more
robust, right, maybe there's a way that
I can sort of like, you know, reset the
function, maybe just clear out my ring
buffer and kind of start it fresh. But
like at a basic level, you know, this is
going to be me kind of just adding the
infrastructure to to start to, and I'm
probably actually getting a little ahead
of myself here. I think I said just uh
you know just set it up so that we're
potentially returning stuff back. But
you can kind of see uh you know another
example of what this starts to look
like. All right. All right. Let's keep
going. Um
nope, not that.
Forgive me.
Um okay, so um at this point um we we
haven't done anything really shouldn't I
mean aside from my little example there
because I got ahead of myself. shouldn't
have done anything to actually, you
know, report any sort of exception back.
We just sort of identified something in
the comments and we've changed our
function signatures so that we've laid
the groundwork so that we don't have to
like make changes to our API in the
future once we want to start responding
to these. So, um to to finish this out,
step three I would say is um number one
um I think kind of important to to to
log if you will the error um which which
is I'm using this word very generally.
That's why they air quotes. This just
means that I'm uh alerting the developer
to the fact that an exception has
occurred. All right. Um and there's a
couple of different ways I think you can
do this. Um two of the simplest ways
right up top are just increment a local
variable or set, you know, have a little
LED on your device uh in production or
um sorry, in development. Um whenever
that LED gets lit up, that's when you
know an exception has been triggered. Um
these are fairly easy to add to the
code. Um but they would be sufficient
right to just sort of like identify um
you know uh that an exception has
occurred and and to help you you know
drill down maybe to where that exception
is occurring. If I had a little more um
um you know resources available or you
know my development environment maybe
I'm storing um those actual uh
exceptions to a piece of memory or
sending them out over a UART connection.
Um again I can get as fancy as I want
with this. I can send out just a little
like hey exception occurred you know
boolean flag basically um all the way
into like here's the error message
here's the line number where it occurred
the module number so you can go ham if
you want you know with just uh with with
this thing here u but but the goal is to
just let the developer know uh what's
going on and I don't do I not have okay
um I'm I'm I'm missing one slide here
too also um which is uh when I'm doing
this it can also be really useful to um
to maybe on the system record some some
statistics. Right? So maybe I've got a
little array of integers that are
recording the number of exceptions that
occur in each of my modules. And every
time, you know, an error occurs in this
module, that little, you know, integer
value in my array goes up by one. And
then at the, you know, after my
program's been running some amount of
time, I can dump that array and and see
my hotspots potentially, right? Which
which module is is giving me the most
problems to kind of zero in on. Um and
uh and again that can go to memory or
that can go over UART or what have you.
Uh so in this example I'm going to say
we're just going to take the simple
route. We're going to turn on an LED.
And that way if this program is running
on my device and that LED goes on, I
just know, okay, there's an exception
somewhere that um that I might need to
to figure out how to how to handle,
right? Um
second, we want the function to actually
now use the the the exception handling
apparatus and report this thing back to
the system. Okay. So, um, you already
saw kind of in my example. I think some
of the ones that were posted to the
comments, we like couldn't help
ourselves. We had to throw in like an
actual error value that goes back. Okay.
So, um, I think my preferred just
because it's simple as an enumeration in
the header file for uh each of the each
of the modules. Um, if I prefix it with
like a you know, the module name
underscore um then I can have as many
different you know uh same named uh
error codes or exception codes as I
want. Um and uh and now then you know
this function is actually providing
something back to the uh to the calling
program that we can use to to figure out
what to do with. Now there's one last
thing we have to address in in this
function here um and that's uh sort of
what value um might we output from this
function. This function is supposed to
read from the ADC and produce a value.
And so if there's any sort of error it's
the question becomes okay well what do
we do? Um you get a couple options. Um
number one uh for some functions maybe
the right answer is to just reduce or
sorry return like some sort of default
value right negative one on error zero
null. Um those are perfectly fine but uh
the you are encouraged for security
reasons to avoid what are called inband
errors. Okay. So um if you follow this
link here, you can see the the note
there on um SEI's website for for this
recommendation and it gives the example
of I think it's SNRF or SRF um which
returns the number of characters printed
and then the first example there uh the
number of characters written is is used
to increment a variable. So that return
value is used and the inband error means
you know this function normally returns
an integer but one of those integers
happens to indicate an error status. So
if I'm not careful and and sprintf
returns a negative one on error and I
was using that to increment like a count
of how many characters were written.
Well now I'm you know I'm I'm getting
incorrect values in this or I'm
accumulating incorrect values in my um
my uh um my accumulator variable. Um so
so ideally we're we're avoiding those
because it's just all too easy to write
code that you know uses those return
values and and if I'm then I'm also
returning like a negative one or a zero.
um on uh on error then I might be I
might be accidentally propagating that
error through my code. Um, other other
things I could do is just return the
last valid value, right? So maybe I I
find some way to sort of store the valid
last, you know, the most recent valid
value and then I just give I just in my
function signature, I just say, hey,
this is, you know, this will be the last
value that we return on any sort of
error. I'll just give you back the last
value. That's actually kind of what I'm
doing here in my function. You can see
the the highlighted else where, you
know, I can just sort of say, hey, this
function, you know, will only put new
values in that uh val pointer if there's
no error. So as long as there is no
errors then we store our ADC result to
the the input value. Um and otherwise we
just don't touch it right we just say we
return our error and say hey we didn't
store any value because there was there
was a problem. Um in other cases the
last one here is uh it can be uh makes
sense to to return just sort of whatever
is the closest legal value. Okay so I've
got a little bit of a farfetched example
here but let's say you know uh my my ADC
is a 12- bit ADC. Okay. I'm returning a
16 bit number and maybe occasionally for
whatever reason um when I read from my
ADC I'm getting excuse me values that
are larger than 12 bits um and maybe in
that case you know I take a little page
out of the audio uh handbook and say
well I'm just going to sort of saturate
I'm going to the next you know you know
four fff is not exactly a value that
makes sense for my ADC so I'm just going
to set return the the next next closest
um I skipped over this slide too because
I so the last thing I wanted to say
about uh you know this function
reporting stuff back to the uh to the
calling code uh is that of course this
can take any number of different um look
any you know different based on which
mechanism I'm using to um to report this
value right you know I can I can throw
uh an error if if if I find myself at
this point in the function and there was
some problem reading the ADC I could
throw an early return in um with just
some error code as long as you know
that's not against my my coding
practices. Um or you know if I'm using
an out argument or a local variable,
right? I can just kind of set that
variable directly there in my code. Um
okay. Uh one last thing I want to talk
about in terms of end of function stuff.
This is a little bit of a a rabbit
trail, but this is probably the best
spot in the presentation for it. Uh and
that's just handling cleanup.
Specifically, those of us that are, you
know, programming in in C. C++ nicely,
you know, will will destroy objects for
us when functions exit or something like
that. But in in our case, uh, in C, we
got to do that manually. Um, these these
might still look gross, honestly. But
these are probably the best solutions
I've got for for handling this. Um, the
one on the left probably a little more
gross for some people, uh, but very
similar. So on the left I've got uh you
know if I'm if I'm doing multiple things
in my function and if an error occurs
now I've got to sort of like clean up
some resources in reverse order if you
will at the end. Um one thing I could do
is uh is use the goto to jump to a
specific spot at the end of my function
that will sort of clean up those
resources in the appropriate reverse
order. Um, and and yeah, mo most people
will say, "Hey, we don't want to use
go-tos in our code." But the consensus
generally is like this might be like the
one exception where it's kind of okay
because lots of other solutions just are
are kind of ugly. Um on the right is the
other one that I've seen that I actually
really like that doesn't use go-tos but
has a very similar feel to it which is
um you know as I'm going through my
program if if or my function if uh you
know an error occurs along the way I'm
setting that code and then at the bottom
of my function I have a switch case
statement uh that you'll notice has no
break statements in it. That's that's
intentional. There's an intentional fall
through. So, we're using this switch
statement to sort of jump into the
appropriate case statement to do the
cleanup for whatever spot we found our
error on and then to continue falling
down through the cases all the way to
the default in order to do like that
reverse reverse cleanup. Right? So,
those are just two little tools for your
toolkit. Uh, okay. So, now we're going
to celebrate again, right? Because after
we've, you know, updated our function so
that uh it is actually returning, you
know, it's actually checking for these
errors and it's returning those up.
That's another huge step towards making
a robust program. All right, so we're
going to celebrate. I got another little
sticker for you. This time it's the
attack cat. Attack cat says this
function is ready to pounce on possible
exceptions and it's not going to pass
along bad data. Um, so another hopefully
another little fun one to add to your
collection if you're collecting the
Pokemon collecting them all. All right.
Um, so we are going to I think after
this we're going to we got a little
exercise. Yeah. Okay. So, but just to
summarize, right? Just to summarize um
we were starting with when we're adding
our our robust mechanisms to our
program, we're sort of focusing
initially on our leaf functions here.
Um, step number one was just identify
what possible exceptions we might need
to handle or or we want to address and
update the function signature um so that
we're not actually returning any sort of
error code, but we are ready to do that
in the future if we want. And then we're
celebrating because even that little bit
is a step in the right direction of of
helping our programs be more robust.
Next, we decided to actually put a
little if clause in there to detect when
this exception occurred and signal
something to the developer. we can light
up an LED or send a little error message
out over the UR port or something like
that. Um, and then we're going to
actually use the error reporting
mechanism that we built in to to send
some sort of value back to the calling
program. Lastly, uh, in this specific
case, we had a value that the function
was returning that we had to sort of
figure out what to do with uh, if it was
if there was an error. So we decided in
this case that you know we're just going
to say hey we're we're just not going to
populate a value in that variable val if
the ADC has any sort of error but um but
you know there were a couple other
techniques that um we could choose to be
able to do that and then we're
celebrating of course because you know
hey this is a this is a robust looking
little function there. It's looking
pretty good. All right. So, let's do it.
Right. Some of us, uh, already leaned
into that. Um, but again, uh, if you
didn't, uh, let's get there. Right. So,
you've got potentially a personal
project you're working on or one of the
sample projects and uh and and the aim
uh over the next couple minutes is to
um
um is to complete up complete those
functions so that they are in fact
detecting possible exceptions and
reporting those exceptions back to the
calling code. The calling code won't be
doing anything with it just yet. We'll
get to that next. All right. So, I'm
going to go ahead and pause for a couple
minutes and uh give you the chance to
just sort of review some of those notes,
play around with some of those functions
and try to get them to that spot uh like
we have right here where um those those
leaf functions are are uh reporting
those exceptions back. Um feel free to
post your comments in the chat. Um I'll
post the instructions uh also and uh and
and I was liking it when folks were kind
of when they were finished posting their
their little sample functions to the
chat there. also so we can kind of see
what what folks are working on too. So,
um I'll shut up for a couple minutes and
uh and let's get some practice in.
All right, we'll keep going. We got some
great code in the comments, too. So, if
you haven't already, definitely check
out that chat there. Uh, I love also
that um let's see,
who was that that just um
Patrick Patrick Wright just posted a
great one using STI expected? We'll talk
about that actually in in in a slide or
two. I think that's a if you're in C++
and you can't use try catch. I know some
projects can't because of the kind of
non-determinism in terms of how long it
takes to to to catch something or
whatever. It's a great option. All
right. Uh cool. So, um we've got our
leaf functions. They're all checking for
exceptions. They're reporting those back
up. Optional step five before we proceed
to to doing anything with these
exceptions is maybe take some data. Um,
you know, we might find that, uh, you
know, I had prepared to respond to an
I2C timeout and actually it just never
triggers. Um, and that, you know, much
more common is some sort of sensor out
of value, out of range. Um, you know,
it's it's not to say that these things
won't necessarily occur in the wild, but
um, you know, this step up front can
kind of help at least direct your
efforts towards what's what's a more
common occurrence than others. Um,
without it, it can feel a little bit
like we are, you know, chasing ghosts in
terms of, oh, you know, maybe maybe the
solar flare changes my bitstream and
right, you know, like and we could get a
little crazy. The goal here again is
just um to be a little more robust than
we were before. We're trying to get uh
as much robustness as we can with as
little effort as possible. So, step
number five potentially just take some
data as your system is running to see
which of these exceptions are being
triggered. Um, and then we're actually
going to get into handling the
exception. Uh, on the left here, you can
see our our simple little task that's
calling functions ABC in order. And and
what I want you to do is to kind of
think about the what the flowchart for
this task or this system looks like,
right? Um, on the left, clearly I'm
going in order ABC. Um, and thinking
about what I want that flowchart to look
like can help me um, you know, grock all
the different paths that I might
potentially want to take. Um, like I
said at the front, there's there's lots
of different things we could do in
response to these errors or these
exceptions. Um, I'm going to focus on on
on three. I feel like these these kind
of three are going to cover most of our
cases. And that's uh, really the first
one. In a lot of cases, I'm just going
to get I'm going to get out. I'm going
to abort, right? If I there's any sort
of error in this function, this is an in
it's in a while one loop. So, you know,
as long as each little iteration itself
is not super critical, I just maybe I
just skip over the rest of my functions
that there's some sort of error and
start restart at the top of the loop.
Um, second, what we'll look at is uh
retrying a specific operation. So, you
know, maybe one of these functions if
I'm, you know, I feel like I can achieve
some success if I just sort of, you
know, I try again a couple times. Or
maybe you can see in the middle here,
maybe if one function doesn't work, I've
got a couple alternate functions that I
can try to to that would achieve the
same purpose, excuse me, that um, you
know, I want to try before I totally
give up on the operation. Uh, and then
lastly, um, maybe I just want to change
states. You can kind of see here that um
you know I've got I'm in one state where
I'm executing my task like normally ABC
and maybe uh maybe at some point if
maybe not on the first error but maybe
if there's like three or four errors in
a row um I decide hey maybe this this
task is not running correctly and then I
I change to some sort of you know safe
state where I'm you know my task every
time it runs is now just sort of waiting
waiting for maybe a user input to say
hey this is actually fine I think I
fixed it. Let's go back to the normal
functioning of this this task. Um, so
over the next little bit, we'll look at
um, uh, a couple different ways to do
each of these things. Again, hopefully
with code that's as as brief and clean
as possible, so it's easy to add it to
our programs. It's easy to see what's
going on. All right, so we'll take a
look at, you know, how we might tackle
that first one. Just abort, right? Hey,
something happened. We're going to get
out and try the loop again. try catch is
this is really the biggest reason to use
try catch because it's so simple right
that's the whole thing it does if one of
these functions a b or c throws an error
then cool I just jump to my catch block
um you know maybe there's maybe there's
nothing in here that's a little
discouraged but maybe that's just sort
of like hey I I identify that there's
been an exception um and I start the
loop all over again um that's great um
track catch gets a little weirder if uh
there are specific specific
things that I want to do after
uh one of these functions fails. Okay,
so you know if function A fails, then if
there's like a different message that I
want to log or something like that, um
that's when it gets a little tougher. Uh
here's one example of of how I might do
that where I've got sort of nested try
catch blocks and and here I'm just sort
of like each individual expression, if
you will, that could potentially throw
uh an exception is in its own little try
block. So if I if I if I if I find
myself in this very first catch block on
top, well, it's because function A threw
an error. Um there are there are other
ways to do it potentially where I like
each of my functions throws like a
unique error type and then I can have
multiple catch blocks that are all
looking for specific error types. But
I'll be perfectly honest, I feel like at
this point it starts to get a little
messy. So this is kind of where like try
catch does, you know, the super simple
thing really well. And then once we get
if we need a little more complexity gets
a little harder. Um, if I'm using return
values, like I said, these are kind of
my favorite. Um, I got a whole bunch of
cool stuff I can do that actually make
this really simple. And one, real quick
on my soap box, right? One of my pet
peeves with folks that, you know, really
like try catches they say, "Ah, the
code's so messy if you use return val."
And I think this is that's not doesn't
have to be the case. So you can see here
I have four options um that I'm I'm
calling sort of native shortcircuit
expressions. These are, you know,
built-in language features that natively
will, you know, run one expression after
the other and jump out at this as soon
as one of them results in a specific
value. So, you know, you can see here
for my logical or, right, I might set up
my function so that they're returning
values. So, I've got my little error
variable that's storing these things.
Um, and then each of these little
expressions is in its own set of
parentheses. So, on the first set of
code here, you know, the error value
gets set to whatever function A is
returning. If as long as that's zero, at
least in what you what I've had so far
in my notes, that would be like no
error. As long as that's zero, the C and
C++ will both say, hey, you know, can't
tell if this full or expression is zero
or not, so I got to move on to the next
one. But if the one in the middle,
right, function B returns an error which
is non zero, well then the or chain
short circuits and my code stops there.
Um, so this is like a to me like a
really clean way to sort of represent
this. Say I'm going to execute a series
of operations as soon as the first one
returns like some sort of error code.
Skip out, right? Jump to the end of this
expression here. Um I of course can do
the same thing with the logical and
which might be a little more convenient.
I know someone posted in the chat that
instead of reporting errors, they prefer
to report successes. So maybe that's a
little more natural to use my my logical
and there instead of logical or. Um and
then I've also got my my turnary and my
if else. Um and the nice part about
these last two also are that it's really
easy if you know a specific function
fails to do something you know um you
know inside those little braces before I
I terminate right but these these
function the exact same right each of
these expressions uh these functions
will be called in order and uh and the
first time one of them you know results
in a non-zero value then you know uh
potentially I I fall into this little
brace here but then I I jump Um, and you
can also kind of see for both the
turnary and the if else statements at
the end. Uh, I've also had this little
block that I can I can where I can run
stuff if you know I make it all the way
through my chain and there were no
errors. So none, you know, all my
functions ran correctly. They returned
zero, no error. So then I can fall into
this last little block if I want to do
something specific at the end of my
function.
Um, I can do uh this. I can also do this
uh with a more general pattern. Um at
the top you have a a dowhile loop. And
this is um some of us may have seen this
pattern like for a macro, right? It's
dowhile zero which is a little clunky,
but it basically means just you know
kind of protect this function and and or
this section of code and really just run
it once. In this case, we're leveraging
the fact that the break statement will
um will take execution down to the you
know to the next line of code underneath
the dowhile loop. So this is it's it's
almost like a structured form of goto,
right? So I can I can list my code here,
you know, in the order that I want it to
to run. And at any point if I detect an
error, break, right? Jump to the bottom
of this dowh loop. Um, and this is kind
of nice because um, uh, you know, I can
I can put a lot of code in my little
dowh thing, right? If I have like some
setup I need to do before I sort of
check whether or not this an error has
occurred and and if an error occurs,
then maybe I need to do some other
stuff. That's that's really easy to do
with with either of these two, right? Um
the one catch I got to be worried about
or I got to be careful of in my dow
while is if I have any sort of like
nested loops you know then I have to be
careful about which you know if I have
like a nested break statement it's not
going to take me out of the outermost
loop it'll just take me out of the the
inner one. So you know might be a little
few restrictions in terms of setting up
the loops there that where I potentially
other break statements. And then lastly,
I've seen it already a couple times in
the comments. You know, maybe I just set
up this little guard pattern, right?
Where like, you know, every time uh, you
know, I've got my section of code that's
running and then has the potential to
produce an error and then underneath
that I just have a little if block. As
long as there's no error, continue
executing. Um, and uh, and this in
specifically sort of is is meant to to
replace some uh like a deeply nested if
statement. So, some of us have seen
coding patterns where, you know, I need
four things to be true. So I'll do if
this thing is true and then inside that
if another thing is true and then inside
that if another thing is true and and
the problem is that's you know that's
really messy code. There's lots of
coding practices that say hey we're not
going to nest that deeply. Um and so
this this makes our function a little
taller right because all of my little
chunks of code that I want executed as
long as there has been no error has to
be inside this little guard clause. But
it at least makes sure that you know I'm
really only nesting two layers deep at
the most. you know, one one outer most
layer to China. Check for this this
error. Um, these
um let's see, I'll yeah, I'll do that in
a sec. Okay, these also absolutely work
even if I'm not using return values. If
I have my u if I'm using an out argument
or local variable, u I'm just going to
replace my expression with um my
function call with a statement
expression. Um and so uh this is a this
is a feature. It's not in the language
standards, but it's supported by a whole
bunch of um um compilers. And and you
can kind of see here that uh you know on
the outermost of my little highlights,
right? I have my parenthesis. So this is
like an expression that should get
evaluated and return something that the
you know the the program will interpret
as either true or false as it's
evaluating this this logical if
statement. Immediately inside those two
parentheses are my two braces. And
that's what makes this a statement
expression. Inside the braces I can put,
you know, whatever valid set of C
expressions that I want. C expressions
or statements. And this can be almost an
arbitrarily complex little chunk of
code. Um, and uh, and uh, I think in
every compiler the way this works is
that whatever is the last expression
that gets evaluated, the value of that
expression is what gets returned from
the statement expression itself. So you
can kind of see here in my top example,
I had some generic expression one, you
know, maybe some some function setup
that's happening. And then um I'm I'm
getting the error code out of my my
function. And that last that last
statement because it's the last one in
the statement expression block, it'll be
the value of the uh you know, the return
value of that a function that is used to
to decide whether or not that the
logical if chain is continued or not.
Um, underneath that you can see an
example where I'm actually using an
outer arguments here. So maybe I I just
prefer that technique or like we
mentioned before, maybe I'm using air,
no, because I'm I'm using legacy code.
Um, okay. So I can still evaluate my
code, right? I can still store something
in that error code. And then as long as
that last little expression there is
just error, then that'll be the the
numeric value that comes out of the
statement expression that my um my
processor can use to evaluate whether it
continues down this this chain or not.
Um okay.
Um yeah, I'll keep going. So, one more
uh one more kind of fun pattern again if
I'm using out arguments or or local
variables is uh is to set up each of my
functions just so that they have uh that
little kind of guard clause um
immediately inside my function. So, uh
here I'm I'm using the out arguments
just as an example. Um and each of my
functions uh are are patterned in the
same way you see here on the right where
uh the first thing is checking hey was
there an error and and as long as there
wasn't then we can kind of continue
executing the function and if there you
know was we just don't execute the
function at all we we return right out.
Of course I'm missing a return statement
here but and so on the left you can see
you know this is like it's like pretty
clean right? I've got three functions in
a row, the same as like for my original
task. And basically inside each one of
those, they're doing their own checks to
see if okay, do I do I run or not? Do I
run or not? Um, at the end even I can
check, okay, was was this error variable
ever set inside one of these functions?
Um, and if so, do something special. But
otherwise, um, you know, I can, um, I
can just sort of bolt this onto, you
know, each of my functions where they
they only run as long as, um, you know,
the out argument of the local variable
is is no error.
Uh, okay. Now, I think
um Okay,
I'm gonna I'm gonna I'm gonna hold off
to go I'm going to skip back to this
last slide real quick. Um, so I don't
miss it entirely. Um, and uh and this is
this is going back to using uh return
values. Um, you know, lots of functions
have the format where like I kind of
mentioned, I just need these three or
four things to be true and as long as
they are, then I can execute my
function. Um and um and I don't need
like a bunch of early returns. I don't
need any, you know, complex code in
order to execute that. Uh like you saw
kind of on the slides previous where we
were looking at these shortcircuiting
expressions, right? I can just leverage
those at the top of my top of my
function. So you've got two examples
here. One on the left where I'm using uh
a whole bunch of ifels's, you know,
again to say, hey, as long as these
things have no errors, it's going to
check all of them in order. And then
it's going to dump me into my else
statement. At that point, I know that
all those expressions that were
evaluated before had to have been false.
Um, and I can set those up. So, false
means no error, no error, no error, and
then run my function. Uh, and in this
case, you know, I can also if if any of
them was errored, right? I can I can set
that error to a specific value and
return that out of my function. On the
right hand side, same basic idea where
I'm I'm checking a whole bunch of stuff.
Um but in but here I'm I'm I'm
leveraging those the logical operators
to sort of run these checks in sequence
as long as you know this is there's no
error here and there's no error here and
there's no error here then I fall into
my if block and I can run my function
otherwise I can just return you know
some sort of error that says hey
preconditions not met or something like
that.
Um okay I think yeah okay so this is the
last thing I want to talk about uh in
terms of aborting uh it's mentioned a
couple times in the chat the the use of
the stit optional or stood expected
values um and uh these these are really
nice features in in C++ um uh I may have
mentioned I can't remember if I did but
these are uh or I think I did right
stood optional is a data type that has
either a value or a null stood expected
is a data type that has either a value
or an error code um and um in particular
C++ 23 gives us some super cool manatic
functions that let us chain these, you
know, leverage the these values and kind
of chain them in a way that um that
makes uh doing this sort of aborting
process really easy. So you can see my
example down at the bottom. Um it's it's
a little it's a I had to rearrange some
stuff, but it's the same basic
construct. I'm trying to run function A.
As long as there's no error, then
function B. As long as there is no
error, then I run function C. And so,
um, there are there are four total
menatic functions that C++ gives us. Um,
the two that I'll highlight to you here
are the and then and the or else. And
the idea is that, you know, if I've got
a oops, I got an extra little brace
there, forgive me around my A. Um, there
shouldn't or sorry, not brace, the
semicolon. That should be a open close
parenthesy and then on the next line is
the dot operator that operates on the
the return value of that a statement. Um
so the and then uh manatic function
gives me uh lets me inside its
parenthesis define a lambda function. Um
and uh and the way this works is that as
long as the function a has given me has
returned a legitimate data value and not
an error code. You can see up here that
you know if I'm using expected that that
function can return either one. If a
runs and gives me a legitimate data
value, then the C++ compiler will writes
the code where then this this lambda
function gets executed. So you can see
here that this lambda function is just
taking in that return value, that actual
data value that A gave us and then
handing it to the function B and
whatever that result is, that's coming
back now to the second and then
statement. Right? So A runs and then
provided there's an actual data value,
we run this little lambda which executes
B. And then as long as B's given us a
legitimate or run correctly and not
giving us like an error, we fall into
that last one where we run you know the
the code for C. Uh and then we can even
kind of bolt this or else thing on the
at the bottom which is you know or if
any of these have given an error code
then we're not going to execute any of
these lambdas. And then we can we can
put um you know code in here that uh
that will actually handle you know that
error code. Um so um so I got to be a
little you know comfortable using this
that expected and setting up those
lambdas correctly. Um but uh but this
also right is a kind of a real clean way
um to have what I feel like is a very
like the robustness and the simplicity
of just using those return values. Um
but then to kind of like chain them
together uh really simply to create this
this code that you know will just sort
of like you know terminates or runs
jumps to the or else block basically on
any sort of error.
All right
we're going to do exercise time. So at
this point we've got plenty of functions
we've been kind of playing around with
um to to to return you know some sort of
error code or exception. Um, now we can
go kind of one one layer up on the call
stack and and many of the examples I
give that's kind of that'd be sort of
looking at the loop function basically,
right? Um, you know, uh, I'm going to
what I want you to do at this point is,
um, is pick one of those projects or
pick one of your projects and
restructure that calling code now so
that if an error comes back, we're just
going to abort, right? Um, you've got a
whole bunch of options based on uh which
mechanism you're using, whether you want
to lean into the try catch, lean into
the return values, lean into out
arguments or local variables. All right,
so pick one of those and uh and let's
just practice um um you know creating a
little little section of code and a
little task or a loop where if I get an
exception, I'm just jumping I'm jumping
out and I'm restarting my loop. Okay.
Um, I'll post those instructions to the
chat. Um, again, if you've got any
questions, uh, post those there as you
are typing up your your code. Um,
absolutely put that to the chat as well
so that we've all got a great, you know,
example to learn from.
All right, I think not as long for that
one, but uh we'll keep moving. I'm going
to try to wrap up here in about 10
minutes so that we have a little bit of
time for questions maybe or uh for y'all
just to sort of like, you know, get up,
use the restroom, get ready for the next
presentation. So, um we're we're
definitely on the tail end here. Uh the
uh um next thing I might try for my
function, you know, maybe it's a little
more complicated, right? Maybe I can't
just sort of skip out, but there are a
couple of alternate things I can I can
try. I can retry certain operations or
try alternate operations. Um so that
control flow graph, right? That
flowchart, if I'm thinking about it,
maybe it's a little more complex than
just skip out and you know, try again.
Um if I'm using uh try catch, uh again,
honestly, not the best use case for for
try catch. You can see an example here
of me kind of trying to implement the
flowchart on the right hand side. And uh
and personally I feel like this is this
is kind of gross. I feel like I'm like
trying to jam a square peg into a round
hole here. Um if I'm going to retry
function A, then I you know what I need
to do sort of like embed a little try
catch block inside my loop, you know, a
for loop and and I've got to configure
it so that you know the if it if it ever
uh you know if I fall into the catch
block, then I iterate the loop again.
But if I don't, then I jump out. So
maybe I'm missing like a break statement
or a continue statement or something
like that. I don't know. It gets even
worse if I'm like have alternate
functions I'm trying to run because now
I got to like nest multiple try catch
blocks inside my try catch block like
okay if that first one threw an error
then try this one. Okay hang on if that
one threw an error then try this one. Um
so possible totally possible. Um just
not maybe the best use case. Um I uh
again I kind of prefer the return values
and and I feel like this code uh you
know here again very simple way uh very
straightforward way to implement this
like retry logic. Uh what I've got
highlighted are uh a couple expressions
and you'll notice you know that this is
uh this this the green parenthesis is
like the first expression I'm evaluating
in uh my um uh my logical or statement.
Next comes the expression inside the
blue parenthesis. Last comes my for loop
at the bottom. And uh and so uh
previously these three were just like
simple function calls. And now all I'm
doing is you know adding a little set of
parentheses and inside each of those
saying well um you know for my green
parenthesis right I'm going to run
function A. Now I've got a little
logical and structure here. So what this
is saying is if the function A returns a
nonzero value. So there was an error,
then the and is not going to short
circuit. So it'll go to the next the
next line of code, which means it'll run
function A again. And if there's still
an error out of that second time, it's
going to follow to the third one. At
that point, if there was if it finally
succeeded, there was no error. This
returns a zero. The green parenthesy
expression returns a zero. The zero
means the the or doesn't short circuit.
So because that first little expression
succeeded then we move on to the second
expression. Um and here again much much
easier I feel like to sort of say oh try
try B then al alternate B then the
second alternate. Um and and I can even
do down here uh um it's not in the
flowchart. I didn't add like a little
loop for for the C function. This is
just kind of like an alternate way that
I might set up um uh like like for the
green parenthesis kind of running you
know a function multiple times and then
excuse me terminating as soon as or
going to the next expression is on on my
success right um so uh so I feel like
you know again I can use those native
expressions in C and C++ to um to pretty
cleanly implement a flowchart which is
at least not not too intense and if that
was just a little too much for you then
I I would say hey well let's just
leverage you know the extract function
uh refactoring technique liberally right
so if I want I can just take trying a
three times pull that into its own
little function and now uh I'm back to
kind of where I was before where I've
got this logical or statement as long as
each of my expressions returns a zero
value then all all three will run in
order um and if I need a to run multiple
times I'm just going to pull that into
its own little function down here uh to
do that.
Um okay, I'm actually I think I'm going
to skip over this. Okay, so um so so
food food for brain later, right? You
can play around with taking something
and kind of retrying it. Um I think
pretty much the last thing I've got is
that third option, right? If I'm going
back to just my uh scope all the way
back here, right? Um, I've got my leaf
functions that are returning uh the
presence of exceptions and I'm trying to
decide what to do with them. And maybe
one of them is actually a little more
heavy-handed. Maybe it's like, okay, I
just kind of need to change what this
function is even doing or maybe what my
system's doing, right? If there's just
enough exceptions happening, if I cannot
contact my server, maybe the whole
system instead of overloading itself
just fails to some sort of like safe
mode. Okay. Um, and uh let's see. Okay.
Um, so to to do that, right, it's
definitely going to take a little more
code because I'm going to have to
essentially implement a small finite
state machine. Um and you can see here
here's an example of of me you know
trying to implement the the state
machine on the right uh where I'm saying
basically if there are you know three
consecutive exceptions that cause my
that would have caused my my sequence of
ABC to have shortcircuited um then at
that point move to this kind of
alternate state where we are now waiting
for for a user input and so you'll
notice um okay dead in the middle um the
third line under the default case so
I've got parenthesis air equals a of val
logical or air equals B of val. So
that's like the body of my ABC.
Um, and I'm using that the the return
values and the logical ores to kind of
short circuit that. If that line of code
runs underneath and the air variable has
a nonzero value, right, one of those
functions said something went wrong in
this code. I'm going to increment that
and if it's greater than or equal to
three, then I switch to this safe state.
Um, and the next time through my loop,
right, instead of executing ABC, now I'm
going to go back to my safe state here.
And uh, and I'm using the function D to
kind of represent this function that
like is saying, hey, we're going to
we're going to post a message to the
user. You know, if they click okay,
meaning that they've they acknowledge
that there was an exception and they've
tried to fix whatever was present, then
this function returns true and we'll go
back to that default state. But
otherwise we'll just sort of spin in
this like little safe state until that d
function returns a true. So um so this
is just to kind of give you this to kind
of think again in terms of this the you
know the the flowchart the behavior of
the system what I want it to do.
Flowcharts are a great way to describe
right you know the procedural steps that
I want something to take. But um you
know I was just having this discussion
in the in the chat um where you know if
if if that behavior starts to get um you
know a little too complex it's dependent
on a little too many state factors right
then I might need to kind of you know
refactor my task to to represent this
state machine where it's like okay you
know we're going to try these things um
and and if and if some of them fail
enough times um you know we're just
we're not going to try to rerun them
again right we're going to we're going
to try to do different. Um, this I feel
like is a great a great use case for
this also is like in terms of my setup,
right? My in terms of my whole system, I
might have like a couple of things I
need to get get set up correctly. And a
bunch of the examples you saw all I
think all fell into this pattern where
like I'm initializing my LCD, I'm
initializing my SD card, I'm doing
something else. And you know, and so
that's that's that's not hard to sort of
have a little little tiny, you know,
two-state finite state machine um to
say, hey, these these need to initialize
correctly. And if they don't, then
instead of like running all these normal
tasks where I'm getting data from stuff
that's not connected, I run it I I go
into a different state, right? You know,
I I let my user know that um something
something wrong happened on startup and
um and and we're going to try to, you
know, um to do something a little
different until the user is able to fix
that.
Um and then all right, we're we're at
the tail end of our presentation at this
point. If you've managed to uh
successfully rewrite a task or your your
system to respond to those exceptions by
aborting or by retrying operations until
you know something succeeds or by
implementing a finite state machine. I'm
going to encourage you to celebrate
again. I got one last little sticker for
you which is the agile owl. All right.
So here um I even screwed it up. I'm
forgetting my little short circuit
operators. But yeah, let's say if our
task if we're responding to stuff then
you know we get to celebrate. We say hey
we're actually doing stuff right? our
functions are detecting, reporting
exceptions. We're responding to them, so
we're not actually propagating bad data
through our system. Um, we're we're
trying to fail, you know, gracefully.
Agile owl says this function is actively
responding to possible exceptions and
won't get derailed by the real world.
Um, so one more little sticker to add to
uh to your toolkits. Uh, okay, we're
going to skip that. Um, so to wrap up,
um, I want I wanted to to reiterate, uh,
not the specific code snippets, although
hopefully there's a bunch of really cool
kind of code snippets you took from
this, but kind of the overarching kind
of themes of the presentation down at
the base, right? Going all the way back
to that one of those first slides, one
of the easiest things we can do to make
our programs more robust and just not
have a ton of complexity is to just tell
ourselves we are not going to handle
errors, right? an error, a programming
bug is is a thing that means my system I
I can't even proceed, right? Um so if
you as you're thinking through those
exceptions list, be cognizant of which
one of those might represent like almost
impossible situations or or things that
are um true bugs and errors in in the in
the code. Don't try to handle those,
right? That just sort of propagates, you
know, it makes things messy when really
in that case the best thing to do is to
just sort of reset, right? or or you
know default to some sort of safe mode.
Um and then once we have our like
reduced list, okay, these are the things
that uh you know I I want to to actually
handle uh I'm gonna I'm going to try to
identify that list of possible
exceptions. Uh I'm going to start by
setting up my functions uh to eventually
report back those those error codes. Uh
and I'm going to alert the developer
somehow with an LED or you know a UART
message that an exception has occurred.
And I'm going to make sure to celebrate
because even those few those little
steps, you know, are moving things in
the right direction and and if I feel
good about it, then I'm more likely to
to continue that behavior in the future.
And once my functions are reporting
these things, right, then I can move up
to the top level here where I'm
collecting some data. Hey, which of
these exceptions are actually popping
that I need to address? and uh and I'm
thinking of the flowchart for my task or
the the the finite state machine for my
system, you know, the the the happy
path, right, where everything works
correctly is nice and clean. So, what do
I want that to look like as I'm
responding to these exceptions? And um
and can I find a way to, you know, um to
to keep that simple, right? That's where
a lot of the complexity is going to come
from. So, if a lot of times I can just
say, "Hey, man, if there's an error, I'm
just going to abort, right? I'll just
try again on the next loop." Um, we saw
a ton of ways that, you know, we can do
that with relatively little code. Um,
that will, you know, hopefully hopefully
bring some robustness to your system.
So, at least, hey, if something bad
happens, I just I kind of throw it out
and I start again later on. Um, okay,
cool. I like I'm hitting my time
perfectly. Um, hey, I just want to say I
really appreciate all of you being here
and participating in the embedded online
conference. Um, such a great thing that
um, Jacob and Stfane put on. Um, super
cool to be here alongside a whole bunch
of other great speakers. So, I hope you
all enjoy the rest of the conference.
I'll definitely stick around for a
couple minutes if you have uh more
questions you want to um unmute and ask
or put in the chat. Um, and then Stfane,
one last note for you also. I think
there's a lot of great stuff in that
chat. So, hopefully it's it's happening,
but I want to make sure that we're going
to log that chat or save that chat uh
for the future. Uh, but otherwise,
thanks everyone. Love being here with
you all. I hope you have a great day and
enjoy the rest of the conference.
Jacob, I think you're on mute.
Ah, thank you. Sorry we're mute again.
All right. Well, I just wanted to
quickly thank you, Nathan, for a great
workshop there. We really appreciate it.
Uh, and also all the attendees, feel
free to ask Nathan any questions you
might have. If something comes up later,
you can always uh we're going to be
posting this uh on demand to watch again
later. Um and so underneath there, you
can fill in uh your questions or hop
over to the Discord server. Just as a
reminder, at 12:30, we will have another
keynote uh talk that is coming up and
that's going to be actually my keynote
and that's going to be on the embedded
renaissance
reimagining how we build firmware in a
modern world. So I hope you'll join us
for that at 12:30. that will be uh we'll
have the live session for the recording
followed by a live Q&A um at the end of
that for about 30 minutes. So with that
in mind, thanks again everybody for
attending. Nathan, thanks again and
we'll see if there's any uh questions
that might come up for you to answer.
>> Hi, I'm just going to unmute myself and
talk because it's quicker.
um in one of your early slides and in
your summary you say fix your leaf
functions
and I thought well it's not necessarily
a leaf function where you're going to
have the potential for an exception.
Yeah, absolutely true. Um I I said that
to kind of help my brain try to separate
the techniques because I was it was
really difficult honestly to organize my
notes. So there's lots of little like
you know as if these 10 things apply
then we can talk about this technique.
The intent there was just to sort of say
you know we are
um initially going to focus on functions
where I don't have to worry about other
functions reporting error codes to me or
other functions throwing exceptions that
I have to worry about. Um I I because in
that case you know we would have had to
talk about okay how do I abort how do I
retry these these sorts of things. Um so
the focus was okay if we kind of scope
down to just just my little you know
start with just my little leaf function
I can talk about just sort of detecting
and responding to these errors. Um, and
then as I get up the, you know, a whole
bunch of functions like I'm sure you're
thinking of in the middle of the call
stack where, you know, they were called
by something, but they're also calling
other things. And now I have to do both.
I have to detect those errors
potentially, and then I'm also trying to
figure out how to respond to those or
report back errors. So, I just I was
just trying to kind of like, you know,
bite off a little bit at a time.
Yeah, I was I was going to say one
dilemma that I I have so often is where
you're in midstack
>> and you are getting exceptions detected
by called functions and and maybe
midcalulation like in like in one of
those um example functions you you're
finding your own exceptions.
>> One dilemma I always have is where do
you log?
because wherever I think oh I could log
in this function I'm thinking but maybe
the parent function could just log it or
any other exception for me and and and
the other thing is that especially when
you're midstack
you need to pass the fact that you have
failed up to the calling function. So,
so, so an exception that happens in in a
leaf function does tend to propagate up
all the way up the call stack with rise
I'm finished here. Okay, I'll just
return my error value. I'm finished
here. And one thing I a couple of
observations about this is that I find
that the actual amount of code that this
adds is quite a lot and you get this
dilemma of well where do I where do I
log the exceptions?
I'm not really asking this as a
question. I mean I don't know if you do
have any ideas um about this. All I can
say as as a as a comment is is it's
something that I always struggle with.
>> Yeah. I mean that's a great point,
right? I mean and it's,
you know, I don't necessarily agree with
it, but one of the selling points of the
the try catch architecture, right? Is,
you know, I can I can I can throw
no matter where I am in my in my call
stack and just skip right back to that,
you know, first matching catch block. um
which you know for some of the stuff in
the middle that's just like hey we're
not going to you know there's not a
whole lot we can do anyways you know it
can kind of eliminate that code I don't
necessarily agree with that because I
feel like you know again that error
reporting is part of the API so it's not
going to make sense to my you know
system level task if a function 12
layers deep is reporting some sort of
error so yeah I mean that's a I think
that's the that that was a question was
kind of parentally in my in my brain as
I was getting these notes together
because I know absolutely like adding
the error handling code can
significantly
um you know uh increase the the code
size. Um and uh I was trying to find
solutions that you know tried to get
around that a little bit.
Um, I think ultimately if you if you
have a really complex error handling,
you know, response that you want to do,
you're just there's just not going to be
a ton of ways to get around that. You
know, it's it's, you know, you're going
to need to take up code to tell the
computer what to do in these really
complex scenarios. But hopefully if you
know if you if you can shove as much
stuff as off as you can to like
assertions
um if you know you can identify that
like most cases you just you know if
there's lots of cases where you just
need to abort right those there those
are some pretty easy syntax to do there.
Um, in my brain too, I feel like, you
know, you can maybe um, you know, maybe
just sort of log stuff at the at this at
the task level, you know, um, initially
to kind of save yourself some time
>> and then maybe keep that code small,
right? And it's like, hey, if this task
if it just is never triggering
exceptions, okay, well then I, you know,
I saved myself a whole bunch of time
from thinking that I would have needed
to have like logged a bunch of stuff
through that through that whole kind of
call tree.
Yeah, but great points. Okay, thank you.
It's quiet so I'm just going to add an
anecdote. Yeah. Um some time ago when I
was uh developing
um desktop software for for computers,
I was inexperienced in C and my natural
tendency wasn't to use exception
handling. So I after each line I would
say oh if there wasn't an error carry on
then if there wasn't an error and uh a
colleague of mine described that as car
crash code.
>> Okay.
>> And I can I can kind of see that the the
term rang a bell with me because you're
not there's no flow to it in case of
okay you got to check for the error and
then do something else and then oh you
got to check for the error. So it's like
brunge. So that that term car crash code
uh it resounded with me.
>> That's and so when I was writing um uh
PC software, I I got into the habit of
using exception handling and of course
as you said before far far less code
involved um and and much simpler with
not having to um propate stuff up the
core stack. But now I'm programming
embedded. I don't uh with with the
version of C I'm using I don't have that
available. Uh I don't think it's misra
compliant. And although I I I I
appreciate the elegance and uh
conciseness of a lot of the solutions
that you are putting forward for um
checking whether we can proceed. My
actual personal preference
is the the the long- winded, maybe
verbose, but very readable. Just simply
check the error code at each stage. Um,
yes, it's long- winded. Yes, it it makes
you know the the
you maybe want to use uh your editor in
port you put put your screen portrait
rather than uh landscape if you've got
any sizable uh function um makes it very
tall but I I this is how I write um
because just the the the
so readable so so simple not elegant but
it's simple
Well, I I think I posted a comment. I
would say it's it's elegant in its uh
its simplicity, in its regularity, you
know. Um I I I'm a I'm also a big fan of
that because I feel like it um you know,
it's like you said, it meets a lot of
the um the the the coding standards, the
miser compliance, that sort of stuff.
And um you know but if it's just the
same block over and over again right you
just learn to like read that as part of
the code like I'm only executing this as
long as the previous blocks have not
like set this area variable and as soon
as I do right all those if evaluate to
false and I just run to the bottom of my
program. So, I mean, I feel like it's a
great technique.
>> I can see an awful lot of people looking
at that thinking there must be a more
concise way of doing it. And there is,
but just because there is doesn't mean
that you should.
>> You know, I almost thought about putting
that slide up at the top like there's a
lot of things you could do in CN C++ to
handle error code. Doesn't mean you
should. And we're going to focus on a
very small piece of things that are
hopefully, you know, will cover 90% of
your use cases and require, you know,
very little code because yeah, I mean,
like I was when I was doing a bunch of
research, I mean, there's there's folks
that, you know, when those like you're
talking about when when something
happens in the call stack, you know,
we're we're, you know, we're doing all
kinds of logging. where, you know, we're
trying to recover and throw and react
and um it can get pretty complex pretty
fast if if I'm not being real real
careful about um you know, trying to
find the the simplest tool to handle my
use case.